# Product & Development - Leadership - Summary

**Date**: 2025-12-15 18:31
**Attendees**: Randall Catiller, Jesse Olsen, James Lancaster, Chris Brown, Elen Meltonyan, Jason Strong, Jesse Olsen

---

### OneRoster 1.1 Release Status

- January 13th release pulled due to partner communication concerns - Jennifer needs more time to contact all partners/customers
  - Second or third time this update has been postponed after communication
  - Risk: Already certified for something that doesn’t exist
- Key technical context - Bug (not scopes requirement) broke Canvas filtering previously
  - Scopes requirement itself wasn’t the breaking issue
  - Only 0.2% gap to full specification compliance
- Next steps - Meeting scheduled with Jennifer, Laura, and dev team
  - Define “definition of done” for partner management
  - Determine actual feasible release date

### All Hands Meeting Planning

- Company all hands moved to Wednesday 9am Pacific (December 17th) - Replaces Architecture Council meeting slot
  - Need holiday accomplishments/recognitions from each team
  - Justin coordinating overall deck
- Team input required - Thank yous, accomplishments, recognitions needed today
  - One-liners and brief blurbs sufficient

### Vendor Portal Requirements

- Jennifer stated vendor portal needed by end of January for sales - Requires legal agreement signing capability
  - API documentation access control
  - No business requirements defined yet
- Process concern - Steps 1-2 (market research, business requirements) must complete before development
  - Charity needs to define business case
  - May need PMO involvement given aggressive timeline

### AWS Cost Optimization Progress

- EDP discount opportunity - 13% discount available without organizational merge
  - Civitas CFO meeting planned for cost tracking insights
  - Well Architected Review scheduled for Q1
- Power BI vs Domo reporting - COG workloads already tagged for years
  - Projects have dedicated AWS accounts
  - Andrea wants walkthrough of reporting methodology

### Resource Planning Updates

- Global Logic developers - Backend and frontend developer positions in budget approval
  - Board approval expected mid-to-late January
  - Earliest start date: April 1st for new resources
  - Backfill positions move faster than net new
- Fresh Service implementation - $600/month cost for IT ticketing system
  - Both Support (Marge) and Implementation (Sonya) requesting
  - Alternative to current spreadsheet-based workflow
  - Integrates with Fresh Desk, provides SLA tracking

### Integration Roadmap Progress

- Technical requirements meeting completed today - Participants: Caleb, Nguyen, Jenny, Sylvia
  - Plan to finalize tech requirements by holiday break
  - Business requirements approval process unclear
- 90-day integration items review - ~10 items need clarity or reassignment
  - Future state technology plan may extend beyond 90 days
  - Alicia coordinating with Jim for resource allocation

### Action Items

- Jesse: Get holiday accomplishments to Justin for all hands deck
- Jason: Schedule OneRoster meeting with Jennifer, Laura, and dev team
- Jason: Set up AWS cost optimization meeting with Civitas CFO
- Elen: Schedule goal-setting session for tomorrow 9-10am Pacific
- Jesse: Send all PRDs, TRDs, and roadmaps to Jason via one-on-one channel
- James: Ask Ops about Culture Amp replacement timeline

Chat with meeting transcript: https://notes.granola.ai/t/281fdb92-8ddc-4062-8f61-89ab920bb73f
