# Master Task List

> Last updated: 2026-01-08

## How This Works
- **INBOX**: Uncategorized tasks - process during weekly review
- **Priority**: üî¥ Urgent | üü° Important | üü¢ Normal | ‚ö™ Someday
- **Owner**: üë§ Jesse | ü§ñ Claude | üë• Collaborative
- **Status**: ‚¨ú Todo | üîÑ In Progress | ‚úÖ Done | ‚è∏Ô∏è Blocked

---

## üì• INBOX
<!-- Quick capture - sort these during review -->

| Task | Source | Added | Notes |
|------|--------|-------|-------|
| Try the "5 whys" technique in next retrospective | Inbox: Engineering Leadership article | 2026-01-18 | From Sarah Chen article on root cause analysis |
| Share engineering leadership article with the engineering leads | Inbox: Engineering Leadership article | 2026-01-18 | https://example.com/engineering-leadership |
| Complete employee self-reflection for performance review | Meeting: ACE Leadership | 2026-01-12 | Due January 20th (next Monday) |
| Schedule one-on-ones with team members this week | Meeting: ACE Leadership | 2026-01-12 | Address impacts from leadership changes; check in on how team is feeling |
| Coordinate AriesCon flight plan with Leslie | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2026-01-09 | @Yamaris - flying into San Jose, need to match van timing (most arriving 9:30-11:30am Monday) |
| Determine if JumpRope booth materials (coffin, banners) needed for AriesCon | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2026-01-09 | @Becky - check with Justin; Jennifer was anti non-cobranded materials but she's gone now |
| Start building async AI support agent for Zendesk | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2026-01-09 | @Jesse - private comment based agent, ~$0.20/ticket, initial research on new tickets, respond to @JB mentions |
| Schedule AI support agent kickoff meeting with Hayley and Jenna | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2026-01-09 | @Jesse - discuss vision, categories, training data from Zendesk history |
| Set up meetings with Patty to shadow support processes | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2026-01-09 | @Becky @Hayley - align vocabulary and understand Aries support approach |
| Work with Win and Randy on SBG integration T-shirt sizing estimate | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership | 2026-01-05 | @Jesse @Randy - Valid grades API endpoint doesn't exist, CIS team work required |
| Complete Angular upgrade this week | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2026-01-05 | @Jesse - 85% complete, 40 failing tests |
| Continue TRD collaboration with Jenna asynchronously | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2026-01-05 | @Jesse |
| Connect with Brent about BRD splitting options | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2026-01-05 | @Justin |
| Schedule meeting with Jennifer to address product concerns | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2026-01-05 | @Justin - re: messaging product strategy |
| Clarify Aries dependencies for messaging integration with Ellen | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2026-01-05 | @Justin |
| Get BRD approved by ELT, initiate PMO process with Alicia | Meeting: Comms Discussion w/ Elen | 2025-12-19 | @Justin |
| Send Parent Square API docs, gap analysis, Aha access to team | Meeting: Comms Discussion w/ Elen | 2025-12-19 | @Ellen |
| Schedule Parent Square integration demo | Meeting: Comms Discussion w/ Elen | 2025-12-19 | @Ellen |
| Market research: Survey non-Parent Square customers first; go-to-market strategy development | Meeting: Comms Discussion w/ Elen | 2025-12-19 | @Charity |
| Set up messaging demo environment with live phone/email testing for Ellen | Meeting: Comms Discussion w/ Elen | 2025-12-19 | @Yumaris |
| Provide BRD links and add Aeries requirement IDs | Meeting: Review Q1 Product Goals | 2025-12-16 | @Jesse |
| Clarify step 8 expectations with Brent and ELT | Meeting: Review Q1 Product Goals | 2025-12-16 | @Ellen - OE 2.0 prototyping vs UAT expectations |
| Schedule capacity planning meeting with Jesse, Randy, James | Meeting: Review Q1 Product Goals | 2025-12-16 | @Ellen - Q1 resource availability concerns |
| Add Jenna to tomorrow's all-hands meeting | Meeting: Review Q1 Product Goals | 2025-12-16 | @Ellen |
| Add team names in slide deck comments for presentation assignments | Meeting: Review Q1 Product Goals | 2025-12-16 | @Jason |
| Get holiday accomplishments to Justin for all hands deck | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership | 2025-12-15 | @Jesse - Due today for December 17th all hands |
| Send all PRDs, TRDs, and roadmaps to Jason via one-on-one channel | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership | 2025-12-15 | @Jesse |
| Finalize Angular upgrade with manual testing | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2025-12-15 | @Jesse - 90% complete, visual validation needed |
| Summarize Parent Square findings and propose continuing original plan | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2025-12-15 | @Justin - Q1 replacement not feasible |
| Get ELT approval for JumpRope integration business requirements | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2025-12-15 | Work habit scoring marked optional |
| Attend holiday all-hands meeting (ugly sweater theme) | Meeting: Jesse/Justin | 2025-12-15 | Tomorrow 5pm Eastern |
| Connect Caleb/Win directly with Jesse/Jenna for Aeries integration question review | Meeting: JumpRope Aeries SIS Integration | 2025-12-12 | @Randy |
| Convert Aeries integration question list to spreadsheet format | Meeting: JumpRope Aeries SIS Integration | 2025-12-12 | @Jesse (or @Alicia will handle) |
| SAML discussion meeting with Caleb | Meeting: JumpRope Aeries SIS Integration | 2025-12-12 | Scheduled for Monday |
| Review Aeries dev team answers in channel for scope/experience feedback | Meeting: JumpRope Aeries SIS Integration | 2025-12-12 | Team-wide; answers needed by Dec 17 5pm |
| Invite Maris to dinner for support/check-in | Meeting: Attendance notifications | 2025-12-12 | @Jesse - re: concerns about new role transition |
| Ask customer: What specific API content/format expected for attendance notifications? | Meeting: Attendance notifications | 2025-12-12 | Key question before proceeding |
| Ask customer: Student count across their customer base? | Meeting: Attendance notifications | 2025-12-12 | Need to assess infrastructure scale requirements |
| Own project data responsibility and metrics | Meeting: Project tracking Q1 strategic initiatives | 2025-12-11 | @Chris Brown |
| Handle data visualization mechanics via Domo | Meeting: Project tracking Q1 strategic initiatives | 2025-12-11 | @PMO team |
| Continue testing visualization tools | Meeting: Project tracking Q1 strategic initiatives | 2025-12-11 | @Alicia |
| Clarify BRD/TRD template ownership between Charity and others | Meeting: Project tracking Q1 strategic initiatives | 2025-12-11 | Initial vs draft requirements ownership undefined |
| Create formal TRD template | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | @Jesse @Randy |
| Create formal PRD template | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | Work with @Alicia @Charity |
| Define POC for AriesCon presentation (OE 2.0) | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | What constitutes proof-of-concept demo |
| Get ELT sign-off on OE 2.0 prototypes | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | Deliver signed-off prototypes by end Q1 |
| Identify early adopter customers for usability testing | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | Prerequisite for new producing software process |
| Finalize OE 2.0 product name | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | |
| Establish NDA process for select customers to review prototypes | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | |
| Vendor portal for partner agreements | Meeting: Divisional Breakout QSO Product | 2025-12-11 | Needed for January 21 partner program announcement |
| Set up Claude access for Jesse using Aeries email | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Randy |
| Complete Domo access setup for Jesse | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Chris Brown |
| Finalize NYR process documentation | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Chris Brown - due December 19th |
| Review 90-day deliverables | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Jesse - due January 9th |
| Discuss developer assignments with team for OE project | Meeting: Product & Development Leadership 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Randy |
| Complete business requirements grooming | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Justin |
| Create executive presentation with SWOT-style analysis | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Justin - for Communications product |
| Schedule stakeholder meetings (Alicia, Ellen, Charity) | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Justin |
| Attempt one-on-one with Jason for project alignment | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Jesse |
| Use QSO to communicate project progress | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | Team-wide |
| Address employment status transition (JumpRope vs Aeries) | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2025-12-08 | 2025-12-08 | @Justin |
| Refine communications requirements document | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2025-12-05 | @Jenna - cutting from 95 to ~80 requirements |
| Present communications requirements to ELT | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2025-12-05 | After stakeholder reviews; couple weeks out |
| Get communications approval from Charity, Ellen, and Alicia | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2025-12-05 | Pre-ELT presentation approval |
| Create UI mockups for Communications product | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2025-12-05 | After requirements finalized |
| Show Communications mockups to Brent, Jonathan, and Andrea | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2025-12-05 | End of next week check-in; target approval by end of year (may slip to early January) |
| Attend MSO (Major Strategic Onsite) Monday-Thursday | Meeting: Weekly Wrap | 2025-09-12 | 4.5-day leadership planning session for 2026 strategy; week of ~Sept 22; Pacific time |
| Share SSO audit spreadsheet with Aries | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2025-09-10 | @Jesse - send today |
| Fix term dates assessment bug - require term dates before assessment creation | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2025-09-10 | @Jesse |
| Add auto-response for unrecognized SMS replies (instructions to use "start/stop") | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2025-09-10 | Fix 20% emoji response issue |
| Join Friday weekly wrap (3pm Eastern) with Justin | Meeting: Jesse/Justin & Andrea/Brent/Jon | 2025-09-10 | First integration touchpoint |
| Join Aeries product meeting week of Sept 17th (Wednesdays 1-3pm Eastern) | Meeting: Jesse/Justin & Andrea/Brent/Jon | 2025-09-10 | Jason unavailable due to offshore meeting |
| Get Microsoft Planner access for 30/60/90 day integration tracking | Meeting: Jesse/Justin & Andrea/Brent/Jon | 2025-09-10 | |
| Send personal notes to key JumpRope customers before broad announcement | Meeting: Jesse/Justin & Andrea/Brent/Jon | 2025-09-10 | Part of acquisition announcement strategy |
| Compile complete SaaS application inventory with Google SSO dependencies | Meeting: Tech migration plan for JumpRope | 2025-09-09 | For Unipoint to assess migration impact |
| Create Google admin account for support@unipoint.com (initially user-level) | Meeting: Tech migration plan for JumpRope | 2025-09-09 | For Unipoint IT takeover |
| Schedule follow-up meeting once Jeremy's migration plan is complete | Meeting: Tech migration plan for JumpRope | 2025-09-09 | For final approval of migration plan |
| Write up AI productivity experiment proposal for Andrea | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2026-01-12 | 2026-01-12 | Take 1 of 2 budgeted positions + half other salary for AI budget, track productivity |
| Schedule TRD session with Jenna (include Justin) | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2026-01-12 | 2026-01-12 | For JumpRope Communications technical requirements |
| Attend ACE Leadership meeting | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2026-01-12 | 2026-01-12 | To understand director-level updates; listen only |
| NYC meeting - present to new salesperson | Meeting: Jesse/Justin 2026-01-12 | 2026-01-12 | Next week, Jesse presenting |
| Complete year-end performance review self-reflection | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Due January 19th |
| Release Angular upgrade tomorrow | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Jesse to release after fixing 2 non-critical test failures |
| Complete TRD by Friday | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Haley targeting completion, working with Nguyen and Jenny |
| Get JumpBot to 95% reliability by next week | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Jesse working on resurrection, Haley testing |
| Decision on offshore developers vs alternatives | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Budget going to board next week; consider Nathan as alternative |
| Create JIRA card for Kent ISD custom calculation | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Becky/Jenna to create; Jesse to review after more data next week |
| Ask Alicia about Aries TRD timeline | Meeting: JumpRope Product 2026-01-14 | 2026-01-14 | Need to combine with JumpRope TRD sections |
| Complete developer day estimates by end of week | Meeting: JR/Aeries Requirement Review | 2025-12-08 | @Jesse - for business requirements sizing |
| Begin technical requirements document | Meeting: JR/Aeries Requirement Review | 2025-12-08 | @Jesse @Jenna - after estimates complete |
| Coordinate with Elen on dev team assignment | Meeting: JR/Aeries Requirement Review | 2025-12-08 | @Alicia - likely Matt Hoffman |
| Schedule meetings with Chris Brown and Elen this week | Meeting: JR/Aeries Requirement Review | 2025-12-08 | For integration patterns and roadmap coordination |
| Determine go-to-market plan ownership (Charity vs higher level) | Meeting: JR/Aeries Requirement Review | 2025-12-08 | @Alicia |
| Investigate usage of Earth Class Mail, Jotform, Never Bounce | Meeting: Jumprope/unipoint | 2025-12-15 | @Jenna - verify if still needed |
| Set up webhook for Teams notification channels | Meeting: Jumprope/unipoint | 2025-12-15 | This week |
| Check SharePoint migration status with Jenna | Meeting: Jumprope/unipoint | 2025-12-15 | Mass migration planned first week of January |
| Review technical questions document and add responses by Thursday | Meeting: Product integration tech questions | 2025-12-15 | @Aeries team (Caleb, Wynn, Jenny, Sylvia) - add responses/confirmations in "human answer" column with initials |
| Follow-up meeting to review Aeries team responses | Meeting: Product integration tech questions | 2025-12-15 | Scheduled Thursday/Friday |
| Begin JumpRope-Aeries integration development | Meeting: Product integration tech questions | 2025-12-15 | @Jesse - targeting early January start, ~1 month of work |
| Review FTE developer candidate profiles from Ankur/Global Logic | Meeting: Ankur on FTE devs | 2025-12-16 | @Jesse - profiles coming tomorrow; conduct 30-45 min screening rounds |
| Schedule weekly check-ins with Ankur and Rashmi (Global Logic) starting January | Meeting: Ankur on FTE devs | 2025-12-16 | For ongoing FTE support and updates |
| Send RCS/WhatsApp/Conversation API info to Jesse | Meeting: JumpRope Sinch Intro | 2025-12-16 | @Kevin Coghlan (Sinch) |
| February follow-up with Sinch - know messaging product strategy post-acquisition | Meeting: JumpRope Sinch Intro | 2025-12-16 | @Jesse - clarify Parent Square relationship impact |
| Attend post-holiday AI workshop for full team | Meeting: All hands | 2025-12-17 | Open to all departments |
| Establish "Claude Root" repository for standardized AI workflows | Meeting: All hands | 2025-12-17 | Part of AI-First Development Initiative |
| Send firm deadline message to Aries dev team for estimates | Meeting: PMO meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Justin - due COB January 8th |
| Add to estimate request thread, escalate if needed | Meeting: PMO meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Alicia |
| Continue TRD development and maintain project tracking updates | Meeting: PMO meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Jesse @Jenna |
| Schedule fortnightly progress meetings starting post-AresCon | Meeting: PMO meeting | 2026-01-07 | Starting March 2026 |
| Present phased messaging approach to Jim and ELT for approval | Meeting: PMO meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Alicia |
| Get Aries CIS team estimate by Friday for ELT review | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Jesse - BRD completion blocked on this |
| Present BRD/TRD status to Alicia | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Justin - same day as meeting |
| Complete TRD review and formatting recommendations | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2026-01-07 | @Jenna - "Aries requires/JumpRope requires" format may need restructuring for ELT |
| Complete remaining ADP onboarding requirements | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2026-01-07 | Team-wide - document verification, retirement setup |
| Coordinate AeriesCon attendance decisions with Laura | Meeting: Product Meeting | 2026-01-07 | All - Monterey conference, travel arrangements |

---

## üî¥ Urgent

| Task | Owner | Status | Project | Due | Notes |
|------|-------|--------|---------|-----|-------|
| | | | | | |

---

## üü° Important

| Task | Owner | Status | Project | Due | Notes |
|------|-------|--------|---------|-----|-------|
| | | | | | |

---

## üü¢ Normal

| Task | Owner | Status | Project | Due | Notes |
|------|-------|--------|---------|-----|-------|
| | | | | | |

---

## ‚ö™ Someday / Maybe

| Task | Owner | Project | Notes |
|------|-------|---------|-------|
| | | | |

---

## ‚úÖ Recently Completed
<!-- Move here when done, archive weekly -->

| Task | Owner | Completed | Project |
|------|-------|-----------|---------|
| | | | |

## From: Meeting 2026-01-16_11-00-30 (2026-01-16)
- [ ] Attend Anthropic/Blackstone webinar on January 23rd and report if valuable
- [ ] Set up weekly one-on-ones with Randy for AI initiative
- [ ] Develop initial thoughts on measuring AI ROI and discuss with Randy
- [ ] Evaluate moving Jira/Atlassian off AWS (engineering effort assessment)
- [ ] If Randy agrees, work with Alicia on company-wide AI effectiveness measurement framework
- [ ] Ask Randy about Claude enterprise billing/invoice visibility
- [ ] Application submitted for Anthropic portfolio discount (@Brandy)

## From: Bi-Weekly connect: SOW, Open Positions and overall status (2026-01-08)
- [ ] Review staff augmentation candidates with Jenna | @Jesse | 2026-01-08
- [ ] Interview Raju (backend candidate) - 10am EST | @Jesse | 2026-01-09
- [ ] Provide interview availability slots via email | @Jesse | Due 2026-01-09
- [ ] Schedule frontend candidate interviews for next week | @Ankur coordinating | Week of 2026-01-13

## From: Justin check-in (2026-01-08)
- [ ] Add developer estimates to messaging BRD document | @Jesse @Justin | For document approval
- [ ] Fill BRD acceptance criteria with AI-generated content | @Jesse @Justin |
- [ ] Make early decision on mobile app approach (embedded vs standalone) | Team | Required for app store approval timelines
- [ ] Negotiate TalkJS enterprise pricing | @Jesse | Target: $0.50 Amazon + $1.00 TalkJS per kid

## From: Aries grade reporting cycle integration planning with JumpRope (2026-01-08)
- [ ] Build GRD table update endpoint with validation (M1-M12 grade marks, C1-C3 comment codes, WH work habits, CI citizenship) | @Aeries team | Estimated 4-5 days
- [ ] Start JumpRope development with Aeries sandbox | @JumpRope | Starting next week
- [ ] Implement marking period mapping - fetch current periods via GRP endpoint | @JumpRope |
- [ ] Ensure schools uncheck "Require Comment" in Portal options | @Admin config | To prevent API failures
- [ ] Work habits integration as fast follow after initial launch | @JumpRope |

## From: AWS resources and AI engineering productivity strategies (2026-01-09)
- [ ] Follow up on AWS cost optimization with James | @Jesse | 13% discount plan delayed from Q1; 3% additional savings available
- [ ] Maintain casual contact with Melissa re: Edmod acquisition | @Jesse | She ghosted after LOI, citing need to launch Smart Plans first

## From: GL Interview: Backend Developer - Raju (2026-01-09)
- [ ] Send feedback email to stakeholders (excluding Raju) | @Jesse | Re: Raju interview decision
- [ ] Follow up with Jason on budget timeline | @Jesse | Expected end of January; potential Feb 1st start for Raju

## From: Jesse - Yamaris (2026-01-09)
- [ ] Add notes to Jesse's NYC strategy document | @Yamaris |
- [ ] Schedule 30-minute alignment meeting for Tech Summit next week | @Yamaris @Jesse | Jesse available mornings, avoid after 1pm Tuesday & 4pm Wednesday
- [ ] Coordinate final Tech Summit presentation review with Allison | @Yamaris |
- [ ] Prepare softball questions for Allison throughout presentation deck | @Jesse | For Brooklyn Tech Summit co-presentation
